# CMake

Cmake is not a bulding automaion tool but a build file automation tool i.e. it doesnt build the codebase but in turn builds a config file for `make` such that we can then use this config file to build our codebase.

Can be used in conjunction with `CTest` for building test code base to test the main code base.



## Usual use

Usually we will first create a `build` folder and then inside the build folder call cmake.

This will then generate all the necessary files inside the build folder and the makefile.

This is done so that we dont polute the main project directory with useless files which are part of the build process. After the makefile is create we can then run the make command inside the build directory to generate a build.



Build logic and definitions with CMake language is written either in `CMakeLists.txt` or a file ends with `<project_name>.cmake.` But as a best practice, main script is named as `CMakeLists.txt` instead of cmake.

- `CMakeLists.txt` file is placed at the source of the project you want to build.
- `CMakeLists.txt` is placed at the root of the source tree of any application, library it will work for.
- If there are multiple modules, and each module can be compiled and built separately, `CMakeLists.txt` can be inserted into the sub folder.
- `.cmake` files can be used as scripts, which runs `cmake` command to prepare environment pre-processing or split tasks which can be written outside of `CMakeLists.txt`.
- `.cmake` files can also define modules for projects. These projects can be separated build processes for libraries or extra methods for complex, multi-module projects.



## Parts of CMake

We can divide the cmake conifg into 5 parts:

- Flags
- Files
- Include
- Targets
- External Libraries
- Unit Testing



## Basic CMake File

```textile
# cmake version
cmake_minimum_required( VERSION 3.0 )


# project name
prject( smaple_cmake )


# flags

# files


# include
include_directories( ./include ./src ./libs )

# target
add_subdirectory( ./libs )
target_link_librraies( binary logger )

# add subdirectory( ./libs/ )

add_library(some_lib STATIC IMPORTED)
set_property(TARGET some_lib PROPERTY IMPORTED_LOCATION ${CMAKE_SOURCEDIR}/libs/some_lib.a)
target_linklibrary( binary some_lib )
```

## CMake Config

Basic formalities like the required cmake version and project name is provided.

### Flags

This section is to tell CMake which compiler and compiler version you wish to build your project with. If you don’t set anything, it will pick the best fit on its own.

### Files

In this section we basically specify all the files and club then into sensible variable names like *source*, *include*, etc. It is just to ease things out, but if you wish you can totally skip this section and use the file names directly instead of the variables.

### Include

This command is used to specify the path of the include directories that you want the compiler to look into while searching for header files while compiling your code. This will also include the header files from 3rd party libraries as we have done for *Randomize* and *Logger*.

### Target

This is the part where we tell CMake the name of the output file, in our case we wish to name it as *binary.* Whatever files names follow after that are basically your *source files* same way as you do while compiling them manually.

### External Libraries

This part is what we call **linking** in compilation terms. So what you have done is you have included the header files of these 3rd party libraries and now you need to tell the compiler where exactly are these libraries located.

**Note:** By convention, library files are name with ‘lib’ as a prefix or a suffix. This is important and must be kept in mind during compilation, both manually or using CMake.

There are two types of libraries that you can use in C++ projects —

1. **static** ( .a files )
2. **dynamic** ( .so files )



## Basic CMake knowledge

### Commands

Some commonly used commands

- `message`: prints given message
- `cmake_minimum_required`: sets minimum version of cmake to be used
- `add_executable`: adds executable target with given name
- `add_library`: adds a library target to be build from listed source files
- `add_subdirectory`: adds a subdirectory to build

There are also commands to enable developers write out conditional statements, loops, iterate on list, assignments:

- `if, endif`
- `elif, endif`
- `while, endwhile`
- `foreach, endforeach`
- `list`
- `return`
- `set_property` (assign value to variable.)

Indentation is not mandatory but suggested while writing CMake scripts. CMake doesn’t use ‘;’ to understand end of statement.

All conditional statements should be ended with its corresponding end command (`endif`*,* `endwhile`*,* `endforeach`etc)

### Flags

Some of the environment variables are overriden by predefined CMake Variables. e.g. CXXFLAGS is overriden when CMAKE_CXX_FLAGS is defined.

Some of the variables can be seen as below, these are predefined according to root folder:

- `CMAKE_BINARY_DIR`: Full path to top level of build tree and binary output folder, by default it is defined as top level of build tree.
- `CMAKE_HOME_DIRECTORY`: Path to top of source tree
- `CMAKE_SOURCE_DIR`: Full path to top level of source tree.
- `CMAKE_INCLUDE_PATH`: Path used to find file, path

Variable values can be accessed with `${<variable_name>}`.

### System Checking

Following variables can be used to check for system related information: Pasted from: https://cmake.org/Wiki/CMake_Checking_Platform

- `CMAKE_SYSTEM` 
  
  the complete system name, e.g. "Linux-2.4.22", "FreeBSD-5.4-RELEASE" or "Windows 5.1"
- `CMAKE_SYSTEM_NAME` 
  
  The name of the system targeted by the build. The three common values are Windows, Darwin, and Linux, though several others exist, such as Android, FreeBSD, and CrayLinuxEnvironment. Platforms without an operating system, such as embedded devices, are given Generic as a system name.
- `CMAKE_SYSTEM_VERSION` 
  
  Version of the operating system. Generally the kernel version.
- `CMAKE_SYSTEM_PROCESSOR`
  
  the processor name (e.g. "Intel(R) Pentium(R) M processor 2.00GHz")
- `CMAKE_HOST_SYSTEM_NAME` 
  
  The name of the system hosting the build. Has the same possible values as CMAKE_SYSTEM_NAME.

### Macros

Macros help engineers to build code conditionally to discard or include certain methods according to running system configurations.

You can define macros in CMake with `add_definitions` command, using `**-D**` flag before the macro name.

This variable will be then passed to the source code which can have a macros which uses this variable.

### Debug and Production Release

CMake helps you to write script to separate final builds of both type of outputs. There are additional build types like Release with Debug Flags (RELWITHDEBINFO) or Minium Release Size (MINSIZEREL).

 You should also set build type with CMAKE_BUILD_TYPE variable on the command line.

CMAKE_BUILD_TYPE is accessible inside CMakeLists.txt. You can easily check for build type in CMakeLists.txt

```bash
if(${CMAKE_BUILD_TYPE} MATCHES Debug)
    message("Debug Build")
elseif(${CMAKE_BUILD_TYPE} MATCHES Release)
    message("Release Build")
endif()
```

### Deployement

CMake helps create commands for installation process as well, not only the build process.

Main procedure in this process is to copy the files generated by build process to a destination folder on the host.  `CMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX` is the variable to define host destination. it is set to `/usr/local` by default. During the build process, you should point the destination folder in command-line.

### Dependecy Management

we can use the `find_package(dependency [VERSION NO])` to check if a package is present or not.

We can use a `ExternalProject_Add()`. CMake will then run the following steps for this target.

- `DOWNLOAD`Download the dependency. Here one can use a version control system or download from an URL.
- `UPDATE`Update the downloaded code if anything changed since the last CMake run.
- `CONFIGURE`Configure the project code.
- `BUILD`Build the dependencies code.
- `INSTALL`Install the built code into a specified directory.
- `TEST` (optional)Run tests.

[`FetchContent`](https://cmake.org/cmake/help/latest/module/FetchContent.html) module offers the same functionality as `ExternalProject` but will build and install dependencies at configure time.



# References

[1]: https://medium.com/@onur.dundar1/cmake-tutorial-585dd180109b

[2]: 
